Good morning, everyone.
Good morning,
sir. Good morning, sir. Morning,
sir. Morning,
sir.
Everything is fine with all of you?
Should be. Yeah, all
good.
Thank you. Yes, sir. Uh, yes.
Sivakumar is very happy today. I guess, um, when something is good happen-
is happening with him.
So you're telling me?
Yeah.
Yeah. Saturday, after a long time, I'm free this Saturday, sir.
So otherwise it's so tightly packed all last three weeks.
Okay.
Back to back work.
Oh, that's it.
It looks- looks totally different Saturday for me.
(laughs)
Uh, it's, um, like a new way of, you know, uh, like perceiving the world
and li- learning things and all.
Exactly.
Like a whole new experience, you can say. Okay, and, uh, how is the class...
other classes are going? Everything fine?
Any problems you guys are facing?
I guess not, right? Because we have already dealt with it like a first-semester
would. So, uh, yeah. So
today we are having a few topics. Uh,
let's share my screen.
Okay.
Mm.
So in the previous class, we, uh, dealt with the things that was the,
uh, you know,
search with informed and uninformed search techniques.
Also, we, uh, like, uh, had a, like, brush up on the BFS,
DFS, breadth-first search, depth-first search.
Uh, then we learned into like a few of the heuristic-based search
algorithms, such as A-star. Then other algorithms are also there,
but we didn't actually jump into those, uh, such as, uh, like alpha-beta pruning,
uh, min-max, or, uh, others, uh, hill climbing algorithms.
Multiple other- other algorithms are there. Okay.
The basic idea is, if we are having some kind of problems which can
be dealt with searching techniques, uh, that, uh, solves some
kind of, uh, problems for the AI-related search, uh,
we can directly go for the like, uh, you know, the basic
understandings of the, uh, depth-first search or breadth-first search, or we can go
for the informed data search techniques.
Along with that one, like, on the, uh, like, uh, basis of
this BFS, DFS and, and informed search, we'll be diving into
a little bit deeper, that is the con- constraint satisfaction
problem. Fine? So CSP is a thing
where mostly we are actually having this problem, but we don't know
how to solve this problem. I'll give you a few examples.
Suppose, uh...
So
this, this, this is a game. Uh, sorry. One of the example.
This is a game, Sudoku. You might have played, uh, like, uh, while growing
up, or maybe till this date we actually also
play this one, right?
Are you familiar with this one?
Yes, sir.
Yeah.
Yes.
So this is a game where 81 squares are there,
and each of the squares will be having some values in...
Has to have like assigned. Each of the row and, uh, the columns will
have, you know, distinct numbers.
So, uh, no numbers can be repeated from the...
Suppose this row I'm filling. So nine is already filled.
So in this row, I cannot fill nine again. Okay?
Uh, in this column, okay, nine is there, I cannot fill nine again.
And even- within the boxes also, three across three, I cannot put like a
ma- uh, like repeated numbers. So the- there are multiple, you know, restrictions
are there. So this is a, these are the actually
problem of the constraint satisfaction problem.
This is one example, I'll show you more examples.
Uh, suppose India map.
Okay. This is a good image of India.
Yes.
Okay. So in this image, you can see the multiple
states are having different, different color.
Either, like when, as a, like a person, we are doing these
things, we are having the intellectual mind, so these are the like
constraints or the restriction we are having.
If you are painting, you know, uh, this, uh, suppose one state we are
taking, suppose Maharashtra has pink color.
We cannot, uh, colorize pink color the neighboring
states, such as Gujarat, such as Maharashtra, such as Karnataka, such
as, uh, you know, uh, Telangana. These states we cannot
paint as a pink color. So when we are actually
trying to do these kind of problems as a human, we are having the
intellect, we are able to fix this problem.
But computers are having these problems, where they,
uh, like are teaching them what are the rules, you cannot like, uh, you know,
uh,
escape by it. Or like, uh, so- suppose you're training some models and
all, so they should stick to some kind of rules and regulations, and
then they solve the problems and all.
So these are actually problems of...Constrained satisfaction problem.
So I'll show you, I, uh, actually, uh, show you this, uh, puzzles
also, like, uh, this is a map coloring problem.
Then come in the N-queen problem. Those who are,
uh, actually background from CSC,
uh, might be familiar with this one, nine queen problem, eight
queen problem. So this is also another
problem, where multiple queens you have to set up in a row
and column. You cannot assign, uh, within single row
and single column, multiple queens and all.
So, you know, hundreds of, and these problems are big.
Like, I'll give you o-one example for, like, w- you say.
Suppose timetables and all you are actually trying to create, uh, for your own
self. You're creating agenda for the day.
You cannot have two meetings at one time.
So that will be actually some kind of confliction with your restrictions should be
there. So how do we manage these things?
So we, for those things, we do this CSP,
constraint satisfaction problem.
To understand the CSP, okay, uh, what are the,
like, different parameters involved in the CSP?
And how do we solve this one? Okay. Then later on, some hands-on
experiences how to actually deal with the CSP problems or not.
Right? Okay.
Mm.
So CSP or constraint satisfaction problem was a, like, uh,
you know, uh,
set of rules we follow, set of, uh, you know, uh, constraint we
provide, set of variable we're having, set of variables having, set of, uh,
like, uh, domains we are having. So multiple factors, parameters are there.
Based on that, we'll solve the problems. Let's understand what are the things.
Uh, CSP is a mathematical problem defined by a set of
objects whose state must satisfy a number of
constraints or limitations.
I'll repeat. A constraint satisfaction problem is a mathematical problem
defined by a set of objects, okay, whose state must
satisfy a number of constraints or limitations.
Just like in map coloring problem, no neighboring states should share
the same color. In, uh, N-queen problem, no
queen should actually share the same row, same column with other queens.
In a, uh, Sudoku problem, no rows or columns or, uh,
boxes should share the same repeated numbers and all.
So we are having multiple states should be there.
In multiple states, these constraints should be matched. Okay.
So, uh, what are the things we have to keep in mind?
Uh, we have to keep in mind these things.
A set of variables, suppose X is a set of variable we are taking,
D is the domains of each e- each of the variables.
Suppose X is the, you know, uh, set of variables
we are saying, uh, suppose, uh, 80, or
like, suppose, uh,
let's just take a simple example. Map coloring problem, we are taking. Okay.
So we are having currently, uh, 29 states, I
guess. So we are having set of 29 variables in the state
of India. So X is collection of,
uh, Indian states, which are having multiple states there.
D will be the domains. So each of this variable will be
represent with a D1, D2, D3, up to D29 for
each of the states. And each view will represent what is the, uh, what are
the actually, uh, variables they can store.
Each of the variables, what are the domains?
So red, green, blue, what are the colors you are providing in the option. Okay.
Now, C is the constraint, where we are providing the information, what are the
restriction, uh, are to be followed.
So no neighboring state are to be having the same colors.
Let's just take another example as well, show you.
Okay.
(laughs)
So X will be the domain, sorry, variable.
In this one, we'll be having multiple states. Okay.
Karnataka, uh,
suppose,
right,
N. Right? And suppose
X1 is representing
Karnataka.
X2 is representing Maharashtra.
X3 is
India, okay?
X4 is
UP. X5 is, suppose
Telangana.
Right. So multiple variables are there for
each of the Xs, okay? These are the
variables.
What we are solving? We are trying to solve the map coloring
problem.
Right.
Now, secondary thing, that will be the domains.
D.
So for each of the Xs, there will be one D.
So X1 will be covered for the D1, X2 will be having D2, X3
will be having D3, and these are actually representative what are the
colors each of them are representing.
So D1 will be having-... except of what are
the, you know, domains of each of the variable can contain.
So suppose red, green,
blue, yellow.
Right? So for D2,
that will be the same as
D1.
D3. So each of the
variables X1, X2, X3, what will be the, you know,
uh, variables we can insert? Like what are, what are the ranges they can
have? So up to DN, those will be the
same.
Okay. Then we'll be having constraints.
So here constraint as C. So C will be
set of rules where we'll be providing.
So each X1,
okay, cannot be equals to
X2.
Okay.
Fine. So these are the the- three things we have to keep in mind.
The first, what are the, like, variables that we are
actually having in the map coloring, the states we are having. Okay.
Secondary thing, each of this, uh, variable have some domain,
D1, D2, D3, and each domain will have some ranges.
So what are the, you know, particular, uh, in each of the
variables, what are the elements you can provide?
So we are having multiple colors for that one, red, green, blue, yellow, these kind
of things. And then we are having the constraints.
In this one, constraints, we are providing for each of
them...
For each of the, you know, X1, X2, X3, multiple constraints will be given.
X1 cannot be equal to X2. The neighboring states cannot be having the
same colors. That is the idea, okay?
This is how actually we formulate the
problem. Later we can do the, you know, apply some of
the searching techniques for the states, and then we can solve the
problem. This is one example. Let me give you another
example. Okay. So suppose
Sudoku.
Uh, okay. So in this one,
X1, it will be collection of X1,
X2, X3, dot, dot,
X81. Up to 81 boxes are there,
okay? Then domains will be your, for each
of the, you know,
Xs will be having one, two, three, four,
five, six, seven, eight, nine.
This will be the domain, okay, for each of the D1, D2, D3,
all those things, and constraints should be
rows,
columns,
and
3X3 boxes
cannot repeat
any, uh,
numbers. Okay? So, this is like a
short version I have written for each of the limits I have predicted.
So for each of the row, for each of the column, each of the bounding boxes, okay,
uh, we are not supposed to repeat the numbers.
So this is how we formulate the, you know, CSP, the constraint
satisfaction problem.
The core fundamental three, uh, parameters you understood, I hope.
Okay? Now from these parameters, the variable, domains
and constraint, we set up the, you know, like go and
solve the problems. How do we solve this problem?
Like suppose let's just go into this one.
We are having a problem that is a map coloring problem here.
We have like multiple states of like a, you know,
a, a map is given, so we are having, uh, Western, uh,
Australia, then Northern Territory, Queensland, then Southern
Australia, then New South Wales. So multiple, uh,
you know,
states have been given. So we are having the variables for each of the state that
is represents them. We are having six.
Domains are having three colors we are using for this one.
If needed, more colors you can use.
So we always try to now optimize to use less number
of colors to actually optimize the problem.
So three colors we are using in this one.Okay?
And adjacent region must have different colors.
So, that is the, uh, problem rules that is there.
So, I'll try to solve this one in later stages.
And how do you visualize this problem?
The CSPE can be visualized in constraint graphs. Okay.
So each of the, you know, uh, these nodes which will be
representing the variable and their domains.
So A, B, C, D, what are the variables that they are
having? And we'll be starting with the one of the things that is, uh,
suppose A can have the variable one, two, three, four.
The neighboring state, suppose B cannot have the
variable, you know, uh, the A cannot be
equals to B. Okay. So B, we are having another variable.
Suppose in the initial stage you have set up the A
value as three. So instead of B,
so three is reacted will be only having option one, two, and four.
Right? Similarly, B and C cannot be equals.
What are the domains of C? Suppose one, two, three, four.
So,
if we are setting up, uh, suppose any variable two for
B. Okay. So one by one, we actually,
uh, provide some numbers and we check if the, the
state is, you know, satisfiable or not.
If that is satisfiable, we explore more states.
If it is not satisfiable, we will go back, which will change, like do the
modification and changes, then try again and explore other
states. Okay? So it's a problem of this, uh, you know, DFS,
BFS or the like searching algorithms where multiple
states are there. Okay?
Show you one other example.
Uh, see here, how A and D is having all the four states, sir?
Because when we have the constraint where we are told that A takes a value of
three. So B also should not take the three, and D should not take, because they're
all adjacent too.
No. No. Th- this is actually not related to map learning problem.
This is a, like a, the constraint is given.
So this is for actually providing you the h- how do we visualize the
problem. So here it is showing that A and
D can be same, or used to be
same.
Okay?
Okay, sir. Okay.
So, so A and D can share the same number, or should share the
same number, something like that. A and B cannot share the same number.
So that is how we visualize. Each of the edges, we provide the
constraints, and each of the nodes we provide the variables and
their, uh, you know, the domains, whatever the, is
left after the edges has been connected, the constraints have been
applied, and then whatever is left and we
apply, uh, like based on that, we provide some kind of
values.
Okay?
Just do one problem solution, then we'll be able to understand, I think,
like how this problem solution is to be
...
Oh, okay. Okay.
So,
so
once we are having these four, you know, states, A, B, C,
D, and suppose these are actually edges are showing the what are the,
like each of the maps are connected with each of the states. Right?
You understand? Now, this A and B cannot share
the same color. A and C cannot share the same color. Okay.
A and D cannot share the same color, okay?
But C and E can save the same color, because they are not directly
connected. So, like, for solving this one-
N.
So, R, G, B, E, D.
Okay. So how do you solve this? Each of the element, what are the
colors we get? R, G, B.
Now, for in the initial stage...
Yes.
Okay.
In the initial state, suppose we are starting from A,
right? In the A,
we'll be directly assigning in each of the, like R- instead of R, G,
B, we will be selecting the first value, whatever that is
occurring. Okay? Now here, let's just put the
R here. Okay? In the
B,
what are the domains R, G, B were having?
So
can B and A share the same color? It is stating
no. R is already selected, so for in the initial
state, let's just, like, uh, write the same thing because
it's being repeated.
We'll explore one state by other, one of the other
state. Okay. So this is the first initial state.
We have only explored up to this point in the initial
state. Okay? We are traversing, just like searching
algorithm. Suppose up to this point we have explored.
Okay? In the next element, the second
state.
We're going for another state. R is already fixed here for
now. Okay? Then in the B, if you are
traversing, if you are setting it, this R, A as the
colors, suppose
R, red we are taking.
Right? ???
red.
Suppose this, we are taking or marking as red.
Now the, in this one, instead of R, we can have G or B.
Let's go with the G. There is a, like, in a
subsequent statistical manner. Okay?
So up to this state, are we satisfying the condition?
These two states are not sharing any colors, okay?
So, I think up to this point, fine. Then again, we'll be repeating
the same thing,
the second state. So up to the second state, the conditions are
satisfied. Two states already have been explored.
We'll mark it and move on to the next state.
So third state,
we are having R,
G. Now, the C we are
exploring, suppose. In this C, if you are actually exploring, C
cannot be equals to A, but C can be equals to B.
There is no direct connection. So
A will be the having domain value of either
R
or... Sorry, not R. R it cannot have.
G or B. Fine? Because C
and A are neighbors, so C and A cannot share the same
numbers. But in the domains of R, G, B, only C
is having this constraint, so R we cannot assign, but instead of G and B, we
can assign. So suppose we are going with the...
Or let's just make it a twist, then we will understand.
Uh, suppose in this one I am using this
B.
Okay.
In the second state, up to this point, I, we have
cleared.
Sir, in second stage, how, uh, C can take R, G, B?
There also the constraints
happen.
Huh?
In the second state, C you have put R, G, B now, so A
as, if A as R, C cannot become R, right?
I- I just have a doubt.
Uh-huh. C cannot be become R, so C can be either G or
B.
Ha. But how did you, why did you write in second state R, G, B, sir, for
C?
Uh, ni- like, I'll show you why, why I have written this
one. Like, let me go for two more states,
okay?
Yes, okay.
Then you will, you will understand what is the game that has been going on
here. So up to this state, that is fine.
Suppose we are going to the, like, next state.
So let's just color this one. Uh, we are having
G, green. Uh, G is B,
so this one is G,
and again, C is having
blue.
Now, we are trying to explore the D, fourth
state.
Up to this point, first iteration is fine, G iteration is fine, B
iteration is also fine for R. Now, this
D, D cannot have the value of
A-So R is already canceled,
okay? So R we cannot, R we cannot take.
This one is canceled. D is also connected with
B, okay? So B is having green. Green is
also canceled, okay? And D is also connected with
C, okay? So it is also
canceled.
So RGP we cannot have. So we are not having any solutions for this
point, okay? No solutions. So in this
state, what we do, we traverse back to one state
earlier, okay? No solutions.
(techno music plays) So dead end kind of thing.
So we go to fifth state.
Now, up to this point, fine. Instead of B,
okay, we had what other domains? We had G and B
both. Okay? We'll assign G here.
Is i- is it satisfying? B and C sc- can share the same, uh,
color? Yes, they can share the same color. Okay?
This blue is shared, uh, this green and green.
So instead of this one, I'll wipe
it.
Uh-huh. So I'm coloring again, the C
as green color.
Okay? So we are traversing back to one state, okay?
Then again, mo- mo- doing, exploring the other states, again
assigning from C, B, uh, blue to green. Okay?
Now, this will be, I mean, the open
state, RGB. We're not exploring up to this
point.
We had explored up to this point, but solutions wasn't found.
We weren't able to find a solution.
Again, in the sixth state, this direction you can say, R is
fine, G is fine. Again, G is,
G is fine.
And again, G is fine. Then here, you
see, if I insert the B here, okay, then we get
the full solution here.
Okay?
So,
this is how we solve each of the elements, you know.
You can, like, think as a tree, like in the searching element, what we used
to do. Each of the iteration we fix some variables, whatever the first
variable that is coming, or if you're having heuristics, that too
also work. We fix the variables, then explore the next state.
So in the seventh state, we are having the state A suppose.
We are assigning the first variables, whatever is domain and w-
whatever is coming, R. Okay? Now, rest of the state are
having similar domains, RGB, RGB, RGB.
Now we go into the second state, suppose we are exploring the
B. A is already explored, now we are moving to
B. Now, B is already directly connected with
A, so and A is already having the value
R, so
this domain, R won't be there in the second state.
Okay?
In this one, we will be having either option G or
B. Okay? So
R is already taken, so instead of G and B, one value we have to
insert. In the second iteration, second state, okay, second
graph of the tree, we are exploring B and we are assigning some
value. Once it is done, okay, we are moving to third
state, and we are trying to explore C, and we are seeing what other domain, domains
RGB, and due to the constraints, okay, we are
seeing, if suppose we are assigning B here, okay, D
is free, also G is free, but we are assigning B here.
Okay, fine.
There is no confliction till now. That is fine.
Now we're moving to the fourth state, RGB, and when we
are going to the D, we are having no solutions because
B, G and R, these, like blue, green, red, all of the
connecting, like neighboring state D is having, so it is not having any
colors that it can, like, uh, repeat.
Right? Then we are traversing back.
So you are doing the backtrack just like, uh, you know, DFS algorithm, where
solutions we are not able to find, okay?
Then we go to the back. So we are exploring currently D
state. So from D to previous state will be C.
In the next state we are going to the, you know, again, B
state. Sorry, uh, C state. From D to back taking us to
C state. In the C, the previous value was B,
we explored the another valuable which we are having, that is the G, we
assigned this one. Then again, we are trying to explore the
downward. After G, going to the D, then again we are able to
find a proper solution. So this is how the whole algorithm works
in a way.
So this is the CSP. Each of the nodes will be having some kind of domains
and there will be some constraints.
And based on the DFS algorithm or mostly
DFS, okay, and heuristic also you can insert,
one after another states we are actually exploring, and we are checking
if the condition is satisfactory or not.
If the state is satisfactory, then we will explore the further
nodes. And in case any confliction constraint is
coming, then we go back to previous state and do the modification
change alteration. Then again, like, uh, do again exploration
of the other states and all, till we are finding a
satisfiable state. If no satisfiable state is found, then,
uh, the constraints cannot be actually solved.
Suppose we are trying to, you know, solve this coloring mapping problem with
only two colors.
You cannot do that, because two colors you...
Because D and A are connected with three nodes, at least three colors you
need to actually solve this problem.So, that
is also, uh, like a certain... Can be some state,
uh, no, uh, solutions can be found.
Then you have to rethink, okay, these are the constraint that is not actually
satisfying. We have to modify the, you know, constraints.
So this is how we solve the problems. Okay.
So, we discussed about these things. Okay. Now, in the how do we improve?
So, as we said, basic idea is the DFS
algorithm's back tracking here coming into play for solving these kind of
problems. Right? Each of the states you can, uh,
like a structure in a tree order. Now, to improve the
algorithms, uh, you know, efficiency, you can use the me- uh, minimum
remaining values, uh, degree heuristic or least constraint
strength values. Uh, these kind of, you know, uh,
add on with the, like, heuristic aspect of the searching.
This actually solves a lot of time and, like,
space. Okay. This is the, like, challenging one of
the things we discussed.
Okay. Another 2 p.m. I'm having, that is like,
the, of, this little bit of the coding
aspect.
Okay. Uh, till now, I ha- I hope you have understood the problem, the
CSP?
Yes, sir.
Okay.
Yeah.
Huh. So it's, uh, like CSP, we are breaking into, you know, tree-like
problems. In a DFS, each of the state is repren- uh, uh, just
like your tic-tac-toe, representing some kind of states
and you're trying to find out each of the states where the constrai- constraints
are satisfied. Okay. If the constraints are satisfied, you are finally going
into, oh, one solution or multiple solutions can be there.
So, that is the idea.
Okay. And this one, also, uh, for Python,
what we can do, we can have multiple, you know,
uh, this, uh, cryptarithmetic problem, then we are
having this map coloring problem, we are having N queen problem, we're having
Sudoku, we're having this. These are all CSP-based
problems, okay? Uh, in these problems, what we do, we are
having few of the things. We model,
pre-process whatever the, like, uh, constraints are there and
all. We do the searching, like we apply the searching techniques,
okay? We do the backtracking and the forward moving based on
this, uh, constraints and all is, that is satisfied or not, and
then we try to find the solutions or not.
Okay. So, the basic idea is depth-first search.
Okay. Take an unassigned variable.
So, whatever the initial state, unassigned variable, whatever
is there, okay, from the domain range, you take one, like,
variable and assign to the, uh, current state.
Okay. Then try a value from the domain that is there and check
consistency with the current constraints.
So, if, is there any constraint which is already, you know,
applied to the, that state, in the initial state, that is not there,
mm, that is fine. Then we do the recurs.
If it is valid, no constraint, like, uh, uh, in the case of, like, uh, I,
example we saw. If no problems or no constraint is
broken, then we do the, like, uh, exploring the
downward nodes by going into the depth.
If we are having some kind of constraints and problems, then we go to the previous
node and then we explore the other childs.
That is the idea of this algorithm.
Okay.
Now, um, this is, uh, for many standard problems.
Uh, the robust library. In this one, we are having this library,
python-constraint. Okay. Uh, this is a, like a CSP-related,
uh, solution problems. Uh, multiple functions
which are already provided. On the base of this, you know, you can install
this library and explore multifold, uh, you know, problems which are
related to CSP events, all those things, uh, mm, that is
there. Okay. So, you can import this one
and also assign multiple... Okay. Huh.
This is like a solve a custom thing, is that graph problem.
So, here, pro- we can provide the variables, the colors, okay, the
domains, uh, assignments and, uh, the
node idx, so whatever the constraints that is there.
If you provide everything on a, like a structured manner, then it will be
able to solve it and give you the, like, solutions and everything.
Okay.
I think today we'll be having up to this point
only. Okay. In next
class, I have actually, uh, thing to ask from you
guys.
Okay. No, not this
one.
Okay. For, uh, first, from, uh, first, next week we'll be having, uh, uh,
uh, this one, grade
lab.
Okay?
Okay, sir.
Uh, so three labs are done. Based on these three labs, one, two
problems will be given and, uh, you'll be asked to actually,
uh, do the experiment and something and submit the... no.
So, first session from, uh, 10:45 to
11:45. That is, uh, you known need to actually
join that one. And aft- before the afternoon session, the problems will be
shared.
Oh, um. The i-
Except for this... Uh, sorry, sir.
Yeah. Yeah. Please.
This, for the-
That-
lab, sir, or this is for the
third lab?
For third lab, there will be some assignment-related problem in the second half.
I'm talking about the next lab.
Okay.
In the next week, we'll be having one grade lab.
Oh, the next week is the grade lab? Okay.
Yeah. So in the grade labs, uh, like, uh, first half you don't need, uh,
require to join because there won't be any actually subsequent
theoretical aspects. In the afternoon, before the afternoon session,
problems will be shared
related to the grade lab.
Okay. So that is will be... That will be based on the first module, lab one, lab
two, lab three?
Huh. Lab one, lab two, lab three. Yes.
Then also one-week time, correct? Yeah. Okay.
That will be there. Right.
So, sir, next week there, there won't be the first class, and in the second class
these, uh, problems will be shared is what you're saying, right?
There will be no first class?
Uh,
In the grade lab season, there won't be any of, uh, like, one-hour season in the
morning. That won't happen. Directly you will be jumped into the second
half season and we'll be solving the problems for the grade lab.
For grade lab, it has to be solved then and there?
Uh, no, no, not required but, uh, we'll discuss about this.
We'll have, uh, uh, uh, seven days time, just like the assignments.
Just like lab assignments. Okay. Thank you.
So, sir, for grade lab, we'll be getting the problem next week only or...
Next week only.
Okay, sir.
Uh,
yeah. Uh, just before the season, uh, before, uh, 2:00 PM we'll be sharing the,
uh, you know, whatever the relevant questions are there.
So today's lab is already updated, sir. What, what is to be done?
Uh, uh, uh, Anil who said this there, he'll... He is actually...
He'll be uploading the problems related to this task.
Okay. Sure, sir. Thank you.
So I'll also actually send him these two copies of this, uh, you
know, uh, this, uh, PPDs so he can also upload into
the LMS.
Sure, sir.
Sir, one question.
Yeah, please.
Last, last week, I mean, the second
lab, uh, assignment, we saw the date as
6th December, which was today but it was 0:0, so it was like
midnight of 5th. So, sir, we've missed
that. So, and we had... One of us has written to the TA
also-
Okay.
... yesterday, uh, so if we could do something about that because it's showing as
overdue. We thought it was today but then, uh, you know, on a minute
check, we found that it was 0:0. So many of us
have missed it, sir.
Mm-hmm. Uh, I'll actually ask him to like, uh, modify the date so you can
submit it.
Yeah, and, and... Yeah, sir, that was one thing.
Second thing is, sir, I had some questions on the lab one.
Okay.
So whom can I ask?
You can ask me.
Okay. So, sir, for example, there was this, uh, first dataset I had
chosen and that had missed, missing values of state.
Okay?
So what I did is I developed, um... I made a lookup
table from the existing data that if this is...
I mean, if say the city is, um,
whatever, um... Maybe I'll take an Indian example to be easy.
If the city was Bangalore and then you check with the city what
state comes and the me- majority of the state you say that,
uh, majority you will get as Karnataka, so you will map the
Bangalore to Karnataka.
Mm-hmm.
So like that with the available city and state pairs-
... uh, I made a dictionary.
Hmm.
But what happened is that, uh, the, s- the data
points for which the state was missing was not available in the dictionary.
So those were some other things. So in this situation,
how do we populate, um, the state
for, uh, unknown... Because we don't know in a real life
scenario, we don't even know like maybe there are like thousands of cities in the
world, um, so which states do they lie?
How would we do, go such, about such problems in real
life?
See, uh-
I hope it's clear what I'm asking.
Yeah. Like, uh, suppose, uh, if we are having like, uh, these kind of
problems.
Uh-huh.
Okay. And the, the main idea for the...
as a data science, if the dataset is
huge, okay?
So if you're not losing like a... if you're...
even if you're losing 20, 30% of the data-
Right.
... but still the number of rows remains like, um, in, like, thousands and
all, then you can directly drop, drop those rows. That is fine.
Mm-hmm.
Suppose you are having only thousand rows of, you know,
dataset.
Hmm.
And if, uh, even 30% of the data, so that is huge amount of data, you
won't be able to have, like, sufficient data for training and testing.
In those cases, based on the dataset, you have to
actually think about a, like, a solution.
Either you can, uh, do one thing that actually,
uh, basically we try to do, find out the, like, related
columns which are having less number of, you know, missing values.
Okay? Based on that and whatever in the column you're
trying to find out the solution, okay, the missing values you're
trying to solution, you do a regression or classification for that one.
Suppose on the base on like suppose, uh, 10, you
know, parameters are there, 10 columns are there and you are,
uh, out of this 10 columns, the state column has missing
data. So in the nine, from the nine state, you do a classification thing
and try to actually predict what is the outcome of that, you know,
state
and you try to fill that one data.
So that is like a way of doing actually extracting or
salvaging some kind of, like, data.
If the data, uh, like, you cannot drop and
like, uh, you have to have, like, use that data for some kind
of analytical purposes, then we do this backtracking, uh, and,
uh, like, uh, applying some kind of classification or regression problem to predict
the missing values and we insert those values.
Right, sir.
Mm-hmm.
Okay, sir. Thank you, sir.
Yeah. Any other doubts and questions?
Sir, for the, this... Uh, for the graded, uh,
uh, the, uh, for the upcoming week, we'll also have
this entire week time or we have to do it in the classics-
The entire week time. Initially I thought of like we're doing the grade lab in the,
like, uh, uh, stipulated times, but the problem is multiple people
will be having multiple problems.
Might be office work, might be, might be homework, might be family-related work,
might be health, uh, related things.
So if we are strictly avoiding because of th- these classes are
happening in online basis for the portion of, uh, people, uh, we
cannot put this restrictions, so we are having this, uh, like
open kind of thing, so seven days time will be there after submitting this
grade lab as well as the... just like the assignments.
Okay. Clear,
sir.
Okay. I guess, uh, I'll, uh, close the session, uh, for today and,
uh, uh, before 2:00 PM we'll be sharing the assignment-related
details. Uh, that will be shared by Anil, sir, the
TA of this one. Okay?
Uh-huh. Thank you, sir. Sure,
Thank you.
Thank you,
Thank you, sir.
Yeah, yeah, please. Somebody is having some
question.
Okay, I guess not. Okay, fine. Then have a good day,
guess.
Thank you.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you,
Thank you. Thank you, sir. Thank
you,
sir.